Documentation for using MSBuildTaskBase class (#6760)
dotnet/arcade: Documentation/Mechanics/MSBuildTaskDependencyInjection.md

> # Purpose of MSBuildTaskBase Class

Reviewer: So I've left this comment a bunch of times, so I'm just going to summarize my thoughts on the #'s in md files. Single # is for the Title of the doc, ## is for Section headers, ### is for subsection headers, etc. Basically, everything needs an extra #.

> In an effort to provide dependency injection for the MSBuild Tasks in Arcade, we wanted to have a consistent way in implementing dependency injection for the `Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Task` type. In a web service or command line application, the entry point into the program serves as a place to configure the dependency injection service collections and provider. Since there isn't an entry point like that for MSBuild Tasks, we have created an abstract class to handle the common elements of configuration. 

Author: Clarified this by talking about how we want to make MSBuild Tasks more unit-testable

> In an effort to provide dependency injection for the MSBuild Tasks in Arcade, we wanted to have a consistent way in implementing dependency injection for the `Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Task` type. In a web service or command line application, the entry point into the program serves as a place to configure the dependency injection service collections and provider. Since there isn't an entry point like that for MSBuild Tasks, we have created an abstract class to handle the common elements of configuriation. 

Reviewer 2: I'd probably rephrase this a little to explain the "effort" is to enabled testing and ease code reuse.  DI is just the mechanism we are using to reach that goal.  So that you don't have "but why DI at all" questions hindering adoption. :-)  If that's better explained in some other doc, a link to it and a short blurb would be good.

Author: Reworded this to open with more information about making MSBuild Tasks more unit-testable.

> Link to the [MSBuildTaskBase](https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/blob/master/src/Microsoft.Arcade.Common/MSBuildTaskBase.cs) class.

Reviewer: Nit: It's weird that the link is on the name of the file and not on the word "link." So suggesting a rewording here.
```suggestion
MSBuildTaskBase class can be found [here](https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/blob/master/src/Microsoft.Arcade.Common/MSBuildTaskBase.cs).
```

> # How to Implement in a MSBuild Task

Reviewer: nit: should be ##

1. In your MSBuild Task class, inherit the `MSBuildTaskBase` class found the in `Microsoft.Arcade.Common` project. 

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```csharp
```
It will add syntax highlighting

public class TaskClassName : MSBuildTaskBase
{
    ...
}
```

> 2. Impelment the following two methods: `ExecuteTask` and `ConfigureServices`. 

Reviewer 2: Step 2 sounds like "do step 3 and 4".  Does step 2 need to exist, or can we just combine this info into steps 3 and 4.

Author: Combined this info into steps 3 and 4 (now steps 2 and 3).

> 2. Implement the following two methods: `ExecuteTask` and `ConfigureServices`. 

Reviewer 3: [nit] I'm a fan of sticking to using 1. for every item in a markdown numbered list and letting the parser show the right numbers. If I need to add a step in between two existing items, I don't have to change the numbers in every step afterwards.

Author: This isn't working, I think, because of the breaks where the code snippets are :(

Reviewer 3: I think it's due to indentation. Your code blocks should probably be intended to show that they are part of the list item

1. This
```c#
var x = 0
```
1. doesn't work

but 

1. this
    ```c#
    var x = 0
    ```
1. does

    - `ExecuteTask` replaces the `Execute` method from Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Task object. Any functionality you would include in the `Execute` method should go into `ExecuteTask` instead. 

>     - `ConfigureServices` should contain the configuration for the Service Collection that will resolve the dependencies

Reviewer: Nit: missing a period at the end of this sentence

>     - `ConfigureServices` should contain the configuration for the Service Collection that will resolve the dependencies.

Author: Grabbed the links that Chad included in his DI presentation add included them on this page.

> 3. Similarly to how interfaces are included into a constructor for a class that will have it's dependencies injected into it, include the interfaces of the dependencies for the Task into `ExecuteTask` parameters. 

Reviewer 2: I would be specific with the requirements here it:
* Must be public
* Must be named exactly "ExecuteTask"
* Return a boolean
* Can accept any (or no) paramters, which will be resolved from the service collection configured by ConfigureServices

Author: Added these bullet points to this step.

> 3. Similarly to how interfaces are included into a constructor for a class that will have it's dependencies injected into it, include the interfaces of the dependencies for the Task into `ExecuteTask` parameters. 

Reviewer: This sentence is really hard to parse. I'm trying to come up with a rewrite that gets the point across, but I'm struggling. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
3. `ExecuteTask` is similar to a constructor that has its dependencies injected. Similar to how that constructor would take its injected dependencies as parameters, `ExecuteTask` should take its injected dependencies as parameters.
```

Author: Reworded this a bit.

```

> public bool ExecuteTask(IThing thing, IFoo foo, IBar bar)

Reviewer 2: Hrm... I wonder if this needs to be (or could optionally be) async.  A lot of things build tasks need to do will hit networks/files, and many of the modern SDK's don't have non-async versions of thsoe API's, so it's easiest if the entry point can just be async. (And even if it isn't the cost of a non-async async method is very low, since if it never yields and returns synchronously, then it dosen't have to invoke the async state machine)

We could be generous and look for _either_ `bool ExecuteTask` OR `Task<bool> ExecuteTaskAsync`.  I'm curious if we find that lots of people that implement this need to wrap the async stuff themselves, and we could alleviate that a bit.

Reviewer 4: I would prefer this be async.

Author: With all the refactoring I've done so far, I haven't seen any Executes being called with the async keyword. Might be worth investigating for the future if there's a requirement. 

@mmitche and @chcosta, thoughts?

Reviewer 5: We do have instances of ExecuteAsync tasks:

https://github.com/dotnet/arcade-services/blob/bf6ee9dbe20c94cdc95938673f82936613ff8692/src/Maestro/Microsoft.DotNet.Maestro.Tasks/src/PushMetadataToBuildAssetRegistry.cs#L62-L71

The root thing msbuild calls is never async

Author: Not that it probably matters, but that example is in Arcade Services, instead of Arcade. But if MSBuild itself never calls an async Execute, then we probably won't ever need it?

Reviewer 6: Supporting both doesn't cost much.  It's up to the author of the task to implement any asynchronous behavior though, and I agree with this

> even if it isn't the cost of a non-async async method is very low, since if it never yields and returns synchronously, then it dosen't have to invoke the async state machine

Async opens up more performant coding patterns, even if, at the end of the day, the root MSBuild call is synchronous.

I'm ambivalent with only a slight preference towards async.  I can't think of anything I want to write (at the moment), that needs async, but I also don't see the harm and generally prefer the pattern.

Reviewer 3: I too have a slight preference towards making async part of the guidelines. I remember a few instances in buildtools where we were bitten by not having an async implementation when we needed it. The pattern has usually been for MSBuild to call the synchronous execute, and the synchronous execute calls into the async method.

Author: Created https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/issues/6772 to address the inclusion of turning this into an async method.

{ 
    ...
}
```

> 4. Similarly to how a service collection would be configured for how to resolve dependencies, `ConfigureServices` should contain the same kind of configuration. Ensure that you have configured all dependencies, 

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
4. Similarly to how a service collection would be configured to resolve dependencies, `ConfigureServices` should contain the same kind of configuration. Ensure that you have configured all dependencies, 
```

> 4. Similarly to how a service collection would be configured for how to resolve dependencies, `ConfigureServices` should contain the same kind of configuration. Ensure that you have configured all dependencies, 

Author: Finished what I meant to say :)

> 4. Similarly to how a service collection would be configured to resolve dependencies, `ConfigureServices` should contain the same kind of configuration. Ensure that you have configured all dependencies, 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
4. Similarly to how a service collection would be configured to resolve dependencies, `ConfigureServices` should contain the same kind of configuration. Ensure that you have configured all dependencies.
```

```
public override void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection collection)
{
    collection.TryAddSingleton<IThing, ThingClass>();
    collection.TryAddSingleton<IFoo, FooClass>();

>     ...

Reviewer 2: Is there a "base" call necessary here?  Or does the base class handle that a different way?  If so, we should include it in the example in the correct place.

Author: In my implementations, I haven't used the base call, just overrode the virtual method so I had more control over the configuration. I can definitely mention it here in case folks want to use the base in their implementations.

Reviewer 4: does the base actually do anything? It probably shouldn't.

Author: Right now, it configures the IFileSystem and Log object, since those seem to be common dependencies. I expect that as we continue to refactor, we may find more common dependencies to add to that, or maybe not? Since this is pretty new, we're learning as we're going on what we'll need or not. I don't mind striking the method in the base, either and turning it into an abstract method instead of a virtual one.

Reviewer 4: I think an abstract method is better, with default dependencies added before calling it would be easier. That makes the ConfigureServices behave the same as the one in ServiceHost, and asp.net core.

Author: Turned this method into an abstract method. Added a bit in the enhancement issue to re-evaluate necessary default services that should be configured.

}
```

> # How to Use with Tests

Reviewer: Nit: ##

> ## Validating Dependency Injection Configuration

Reviewer: Nit: ###

To ensure that the service collection has been properly configured, you should include a test to validate the registration of the dependencies. The following is an example of that kind of test: 

```
[Fact]
public void AreDependenciesRegistered()
{
    MSBuildTaskClass task = new MSBuildTaskClass();

    var collection = new ServiceCollection();
    task.ConfigureServices(collection);
    var provider = collection.BuildServiceProvider();

    foreach(var dependency in task.GetExecuteParameterTypes())
    {

>         var service = provider.GetRequiredService(dependency);

Reviewer 2: This will cause them to be constructed.

There should be an optional parameter to "IsDependencyResolutionCoherent" that is "additionalTypes".  We can just pass those types to it.  (It makes for nicer error messages as well)

Author: Refactored this in all the tests and the documentation. Definitely handier to use the additionalScopedTypes than this.

Reviewer 2: Hrm.  I don't _think_ we actually scope them, so it's probably more accurate to use the "additionalSingletonTypes".  The two parameters are mostly just "is this type going to be resolved inside a nested scope or not".

The only difference is that "additionalSingletonTypes" will report an error if you resolve a "AddScoped" object, since it's implied they are being used in a non-scoped context, and that does weird/bad things in DI.

Author: I updated it to Singleton after I made this comment. I realized my mistake and then verified that you had a Scoped AND Singleton version of the additional types in there :)

        service.Should().NotBeNull();
    }

    DependencyInjectionValidation.IsDependencyResolutionCoherent(
            s =>
            {
                task.ConfigureServices(s);
            },
            out string message
        )
        .Should()
        .BeTrue(message);
}
```

> This test uses a helper class that is provided in the `Microsoft.DotNet.Internal.DependencyInjection.Testing` project. 

Author: Included this remark in the whole bit about writing this test.

> ## Mocking Services for Task Unit Tests

Reviewer: Nit: ###

1. Create the mocks for the services to be injected into the task, and add them to a new service collection to be used in the test. 

```csharp
var collection = new ServiceCollection()
    .AddSingleton(thingMock.Object)
    .AddSingleton(fooMock.Object);
```

> 2. Pass that collection into the Task's `ConfigureServices` method. If the `ConfigureServices` method registers dependencies using TryAdds, it shouldn't add conflicting dependency registrations into the collection. 

Reviewer 4: I think this is backwards. The Task's ConfigureServices method needs to add everything it needs to execute, so by definition it will add non-mocks for everything. The mocks need to be added after calling ConfigureServices so they replace the default implementations.

Although I think a test that is testing the task's functionality shouldn't even call ConfigureServices, just invoke the ExecuteTask method and pass in mocks to the parameters.

Author: You're right, a test doesn't even need to call ConfigureServices if it's mocking out everything. I can definitely mention that as an option, and that if the developer doesn't care about certain mocks and wants the default service, they can pass their collection into the task's ConfigureServices method to get the stuff they didn't want/need to configure.

Reviewer 2: I think they should get in the habit of calling "ConfigureServices" even if they do mock everything. I've added wrappers before that don't really need to get mocked (to isolate and share some piece of business logic, for example).

It's _super_ frustrating to have to go edit dozens or hundreds of tests if they aren't calling the base registration methods.

It's a cheap thing to do in the tests that doesn't hurt anything, and can prevent a lot of pain later.

I'd leave the document calling it.

As to the before/after, it only really matters if someone is resolving an IEnumerable<IThing>.  If it's before, then the "try" won't register another one, and the mock will "win"... but that also probably defeats the purpose of the IEnumerable.

Basically you can't mock things that are injected by the IEnumerable<> interface.

Reviewer 4: technically you can, but you would have to remove things from the collection, which isn't super hard, just annoying

Reviewer 2: True, true. Hadn't considered that you can actually remove stuff.  It's... weird.  But it could be done if necessary. :-)

Author: kk, resolving this comment. Leaving everything as is :)

> 2. Pass that collection into the Task's `ConfigureServices` method. If the `ConfigureServices` method registers dependencies using TryAdds, it shouldn't add conflicting dependency registrations into the collection. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Pass that collection into the Task's `ConfigureServices` method. If the `ConfigureServices` method registers dependencies using `TryAdd`s, it shouldn't add conflicting dependency registrations into the collection. 
```

```
MSBuildTaskClass task = new MSBuildTaskClass();
task.ConfigureServices(collection);
```

3. Build the service provider and pass it into the method that will resolve the dependencies and invoke the `ExecuteTask` method.

```
using var provider = collection.BuildServiceProvider();

> task.InvokeExecute(provider);

Reviewer 2: Probably want to save the output boolean. :-)

```

# What's Happening Behind the Scenes

The `MSBuildTaskBase` class inherits `Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Task`, so it implements the `Execute` method that MSBuild Task classes implement. It uses reflection to accomplish resolving the services defined in the concrete class' `ExecuteTask` method. 

The Task's `Execute` is traditionally the method that is called when running the task. It is required to be implemented when inheriting the `Microsoft.Build.Utilities.Task` class. 

The `Execute` method serves as the Task's entry point, that handles the registration of dependencies that are defined in the concrete implementation of the `MSBuildTaskBase` class. In this method, a new `ServiceCollection` is created. It is passed into the `ConfigureServices` method to be populated with the configuration defined in the concrete implementation. Then, it builds the service provider that is passed into the `InvokeExecute` method. 

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could this just be a link to the actual code?  Code in docs go stale _so fast_ that if it's real code in the codebase, it's better to just reference it.

Author: Agreed. Let me see if there's a fancy markdown way I can embed the actual code instead of having to copy/paste it.

Reviewer 3: If the code lives in the same repo as the PR, just using a link to the lines you care about should do it. Sort of like here: 

https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/blob/cac51b21e00714e9a51b63f4a4a51bf92a4685b1/eng/Signing.props#L25-L28

Author: perfect, that's exactly the magic I want

Reviewer 3: Ooh, but I'm not sure if it works in checked in docs. I hope it does!

Author: Embedding doesn't work in docs like it does here :(  Included links to the code in the document where relevant.

public override sealed bool Execute()
{
    ServiceCollection collection = new ServiceCollection();
    ConfigureServices(collection);
    using (var provider = collection.BuildServiceProvider())
    {
        return InvokeExecute(provider);
    }
}
```

> `MSBuildTaskBase` contains a virtual implementation of `ConfigureServices` that configures common dependencies, such as `IFileSystem` (if you want to abstract the File and Directory classes so they can be mocked out for tests) and `TaskLoggingHelper` object called `Log`. It is expected that this method will be overridden. 

Reviewer 3: [nit]
```suggestion
`MSBuildTaskBase` contains a virtual implementation of `ConfigureServices` that configures common dependencies, such as `IFileSystem` (if you want to abstract the File and Directory classes so they can be mocked out for tests) and a `TaskLoggingHelper` object called `Log`. It is expected that this method will be overridden. 
```

```csharp
public virtual void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection collection)
{
    collection.TryAddSingleton<IFileSystem, FileSystem>();

>     collection.TryAddSingleton(Log);

Reviewer 4: I'm not a fan of the "default" services getting added in the base implementation of ConfigureServices. In asp.net the ConfigureServices method doesn't have to call base, because the base method doesn't do anything, the "default" services are configured before calling ConfigureServices. I can't see any task not wanting these services, so every task needs to call base.ConfigureServices(). That is different from how asp.net works so it will probably cause confusion.

Author: @ChadNedzlek, any opposition for me changing ConfigureServices to an abstract method?

Reviewer 2: No, makes perfect sense.  Probably wrap it in some _other_ method... so in the base class you have something like:
```csharp
public bool TaskExecuterThing() {
    // make the collection
    InitalizeServiceCollection(collection);
    using var provider = collection.BuildServiceProvider();
}

public void InitalizeServiceCollection(IServiceCollection collection) {
    ConfigureServices(collection);
    collection.TryAddSingleton<IFileSystem, FileSystem>();
    collection.TryAddSingleton(Log);
}

protected abstract void ConfigureServices(IServiceCollection collection);
```

Author: Included this refactor in this issue: https://github.com/dotnet/arcade/issues/6772
